{"Abstract": ["The objective of this study was to determine if elevations in blood glucose, in a range classified as impaired fasting glucose, are associated with a greater incidence of cerebrovascular disease in nondiabetic patients. Morning blood glucose determinations were evaluated with respect to subsequent stroke using records from 28 477 nondiabetic patients. Strokes and transient ischemic attacks (TIA) were identified from ICD-9 coding for a new event more than a year after baseline glucose determinations. Of the patients studied, 593 suffered stroke or TIA over a total risk analysis time of 100 982 years. Higher baseline morning glucose (100 to 126 mg/dL vs under 100 mg/dL) was associated with 31% more diagnoses (2.4% vs 1.8%, P < .001). Incidence rate was 5.3 per 1000 patient-years for those patients with glucose over 100 mg/dL and 3.9 per 1000 patient-years for those with glucose under 100 mg/dL (P <.001). Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that elevated baseline glucose was associated with a progressive, increased risk with time. A Cox proportional hazards model with adjustment for age, body mass index, sex, creatinine, lipids, smoking, and medications showed that elevated fasting glucose was associated with an increased hazard for a new event (hazard ratio 1.24, 95% CI 1.05-1.46, glucose over 100 mg/dL vs under 100 mg/dL). Thus, patients with higher baseline blood glucose levels in the absence of diabetes and after adjustment for covariants have a significantly greater risk for development of cerebrovascular disease."], "Research Design and Methods Subjects": ["The study included subjects who were cared for at 1 or more of 8 northwest Veterans Affairs medical centers in Seattle, Portland, Boise, Spokane, Walla Walla, Roseburg, White City, and Anchorage. Unidentified data were extracted from the electronic medical record systems of each facility and aggregated in an SQL database. No names, addresses, or other personal identifiers were included. The study was pursued as part of a project to develop automated methods for identification of associations between medication use, laboratory results, and medical outcomes. The project was reviewed and approved by the University of Washington\u2212Seattle Investigational Review Board. The University of Nevada Investigational Review Board exempted the project because data included no personal identifiers."], "Data": ["Electronic records were used to identify nondiabetic subjects who had at least 2 years of medical care and blood glucose determinations at least 1 year prior to an initial indication of CVD as identified from ICD-9 coding. The record database included ICD-9 diagnostic information, medication use, laboratory data, and vital signs over the period from 1994 through December 2003. Records were excluded if there was any indication of possible diabetes including ICD-9 diagnosis of diabetes or a complication of diabetes, use of oral hypoglycemic medication, use of insulin, or a blood glucose greater than 126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol) at any time during the patient's care. Since glucocorticoids (oral or parenteral) could affect glucose determinations, patients who used these medications prior to a diagnosis of CVD were also excluded. With the objective of including predominantly fasting glucose determinations, only morning glucose determinations before 10 AM were included. Blood glucose determinations were performed at each hospital and were most often as part of an initial screening chemistry panel. Over 90% of patients followed for at least 2 years with any laboratory testing had measures of blood glucose performed. After exclusions, 28 477 records were available for nondiabetic subjects with information concerning at least 2 years of care, ICD9 diagnostic coding, and baseline information including age, sex, body mass index (BMI), blood pressure, smoking status, glucose, creatinine, lipid determinations, and medications. Medications were identified from pharmacy data (prescription issue dates corresponding to period of follow-up).", "New cerebrovascular disease diagnoses of stroke or TIA were identified from ICD-9 coding (436, 435.8, 435.9, and 437.1 subgroups)."], "Statistical Analysis": ["Subjects were grouped with respect to baseline blood glucose of less than 100 mg/dL as compared with those who had glucose of 100 to 125 mg/dL. Stroke or TIA occurring more than 1 year after the initial glucose determination was evaluated using Cox proportional hazards regression models and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. Statistical significance was defined by a two-tailed P value of less than .05. Data was aggregated using Microsoft SQL Server 2000 and analyzed using Stata SE version 9.0 (Stata Corporation, College Station, Texas)."], "Results": ["Subject groups defined by baseline glucose determinations were compared between glucose levels less than 100 mg/dL and glucose of 100 to 125 mg/dL. As shown in Table 1, characteristics of the groups were similar although the higher glucose groups had slightly greater age, body mass index, and blood pressure. Over the average 6-to 7-year period of care following an initial glucose determination, higher glucose was associated with greater occurrence of TIA or stroke. Of patients with glucose under 100 mg/dL, 1.8% suffered an event, in contrast to 2.4% of patients with glucose 100 to 126 mg/dL, revealing a 31% greater frequency (P < .001). The incidence rate increased from 3.9 cases per 1000 patient-years (baseline glucose < 100 mg/dL) to 5.3 cases/1000 patient-years (glucose 100 to 125 mg/dL, P < .001). Thus, a new diagnosis of cerebrovascular disease including TIA and stroke was significantly more frequent when the baseline morning glucose was 100 to 125 mg/dL (5.5 to 7 mM) in contrast to under 100 mg/dL (Figure 1).", "Kaplan-Meier survival/morbidity analysis showed that patients with higher baseline glucose had a progressive increase in incidence of cerebrovascular disease over a period of 8 years (Figure 2).", "Multivariate regression analysis was performed to evaluate the risk of elevated glucose in the context of additional factors associated with coronary disease. Without correction for covariates, a Cox proportional hazards regression model showed that baseline glucose over 100 mg/dL was associated with a significant risk for CVD (hazard ratio 1.35, 95% CI 1. 15 inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor blockers). Age, body mass index, creatinine, LDL, HDL, and triglycerides were analyzed as continuous variables. Cox regression analysis of 28 477 records comprising 100 982 years at risk and 593 instances of new TIA or stroke demonstrated increased risk for CVD (hazard ratio 1.24, 95% CI 1.05-1.46, P = .01) after corrections."], "Discussion": ["The results of this study demonstrate that elevated glucose in the absence of diabetes is associated with greater incidence of cerebrovascular disease independent of other recognized risk factors including age, weight, hyperlipidemia, renal failure, and hypertension. Both the relative risk for cerebrovascular disease and the progressive increase in incidence indicate that modest increases in blood glucose are associated with an increased incidence of TIA and stroke. These results extend previous descriptions of the association between elevated glucose and CVD and confirm that commonly used morning glucose determinations can provide a significant indication of CVD risk. Studies of elevated glucose are commonly confounded by additional risk factors for CVD including age, gender, BMI, renal failure, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension. One study that included diabetics showed an association of fasting glucose with risk for CVD after correction for covariants. 3 Our results show that nondiabetic patients who have elevations in glucose above 100 mg/dL are at increased risk for CVD even after adjustment for multiple covariants. Furthermore, because glucose determinations were performed at least 1 year before a first diagnosis of CVD, the results are consistent with the possibility that elevated glucose contributes to the pathogenesis of CVD. Since elevated fasting glucose is an increasingly common problem, it may be clinically useful to include consideration of glucose in addition to other better recognized risk factors including hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and obesity. The identification of elevated glucose as a risk factor is of interest both with respect to identification of patients at risk and possibly as a basis for treatment.", "Although elevated fasting glucose and glucose intolerance have been associated with CVD, 3,13 common covariates have not always been studied, 2 and it remains unclear whether elevations in glucose contribute to disease pathogenesis. It is known that elevation of blood glucose can contribute to the pathogenesis of cerebrovascular disease. Elevated glucose induces nonenzymatic protein glycosylation, protein kinase C activation, and oxidative stress. 15 Vascular disease may be related to endothelial dysfunction, 16 proinflammatory changes, 17 and a prothrombotic state. 18 Since effects of glucose may not have a lower threshold, modest changes in blood glucose could be of clinical significance.", "Because elevations of glucose were independently associated with risk for future cerebrovascular events and mechanisms of glucose associated pathology are recognized, it is plausible that interventions to control glucose even in nondiabetic patients could reduce TIA and stroke. Control of postprandial hyperglycemia has been shown to improve carotid atherosclerosis 19 ; however, there is little clinical evidence that improved glycemic control can reduce or prevent cerebrovascular events. Since consequences of stroke are severe, small reductions in frequency that may be difficult to statistically detect are of clinical importance.", "In summary, our data demonstrate the association of elevated glucose above 100 mg/dL with subsequent risk for TIA and stroke in the absence of diabetes. Although it remains unclear whether interventions to lower glucose can reduce risk, elevated fasting glucose appears to be an additional indication for careful clinical evaluation with respect to cerebrovascular disease. "], "all_tables": [[], ["Table 1 .", "-1.59, P < .001). A model was then constructed with corrections for age, sex, body mass index, creatinine, diagnosis of hypertension, smoking, low density lipoprotein (LDL), high density lipoprotein (HDL), triglycerides, and medication use (beta-blockers, statins, thiazide diuretics, angiotensin converting enzyme Subgroups Based on Baseline Morning Glucose Determinations", "<table><row><cell>Nielson, Fleming</cell><cell>Glucose and Cerebrovascular Disease</cell><cell>627</cell></row></table>"]], "all_figure_descriptions": ["Figure 2. Kaplan-Meier failure analysis for cerebrovascular disease (acute transient ischemic attack or stroke) from patients with baseline glucose less than 100 mg/dL or 110 to 125 mg/dL as indicated."], "Abstract_sup": ["The objective of this study was to determine if elevations in blood glucose, in a range classified as impaired fasting glucose, are associated with a greater incidence of cerebrovascular disease in nondiabetic patients. Morning blood glucose determinations were evaluated with respect to subsequent stroke using records from 28 477 nondiabetic patients. Strokes and transient ischemic attacks (TIA) were identified from ICD-9 coding for a new event more than a year after baseline glucose determinations. Of the patients studied, 593 suffered stroke or TIA over a total risk analysis time of 100 982 years. Higher baseline morning glucose (100 to 126 mg/dL vs under 100 mg/dL) was associated with 31% more diagnoses (2.4% vs 1.8%, P < .001). Incidence rate was 5.3 per 1000 patient-years for those patients with glucose over 100 mg/dL and 3.9 per 1000 patient-years for those with glucose under 100 mg/dL (P <.001). Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that elevated baseline glucose was associated with a progressive, increased risk with time. A Cox proportional hazards model with adjustment for age, body mass index, sex, creatinine, lipids, smoking, and medications showed that elevated fasting glucose was associated with an increased hazard for a new event (hazard ratio 1.24, 95% CI 1.05-1.46, glucose over 100 mg/dL vs under 100 mg/dL). Thus, patients with higher baseline blood glucose levels in the absence of diabetes and after adjustment for covariants have a significantly greater risk for development of cerebrovascular disease."]}